# XSLT Functions

By including the following namespace:

```xml
xmlns:s="stroom"
```

E.g.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<xsl:stylesheet
    xmlns="event-logging:3"
    xmlns:s="stroom"
    xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    version="2.0">
```

The following functions are available to aid your translation:

* `bitmap-lookup(String map, String key)` - Bitmap based look up against reference data map using the period start time
* `bitmap-lookup(String map, String key, String time)` - Bitmap based look up against reference data map using a specified time, e.g. the event time
* `bitmap-lookup(String map, String key, String time, Boolean ignoreWarnings)` - Bitmap based look up against reference data map using a specified time, e.g. the event time, and ignore any warnings generated by a failed lookup
* `classification()` - The classification of the feed for the data being processed
* `current-time()` - The current system time
* `current-user()` - The current user logged into Stroom (only relevant for interactive use, e.g. search)
* `dictionary(String name)` - Loads the contents of the named dictionary for use within the translation
* `feed-name()` - Name of the feed for the data being processed
* `format-date(String date, String pattern)` - Format a date that uses the specified pattern using the default time zone
* `format-date(String date, String pattern, String timeZone)` - Format a date that uses the specified pattern with the specified time zone
* `format-date(String date, String patternIn, String timeZoneIn, String patternOut, String timeZoneOut)` - Parse a date with the specified input pattern and time zone and format the output with the specified output pattern and time zone
* `format-date(String milliseconds)` - Format a date that is specified as a number of milliseconds since a standard base time known as "the epoch", namely January 1, 1970, 00:00:00 GMT
* `get(String key)` - Returns the value associated with a key that has been stored using put()
* `hash(String value)` - Hash a string value using the default `SHA-256` algorithm and no salt
* `hash(String value, String algorithm, String salt)` - Hash a string value using the specified hashing algorithm and supplied salt value. Supported hashing algorithms include `SHA-256`, `SHA-512`, `MD5`.
* `json-to-xml(String json)` - Returns an XML representation of the supplied JSON value for use in XPath expressions
* `link(String url)` - Creates a stroom dashboard table link.
* `link(String title, String url)` - Creates a stroom dashboard table link.
* `link(String title, String url, String type)` - Creates a stroom dashboard table link.
* `log(String severity, String message)` - Logs a message to the processing log with the specified severity
* `lookup(String map, String key)` - Look up a reference data map using the period start time
* `lookup(String map, String key, String time)` - Look up a reference data map using a specified time, e.g. the event time
* `lookup(String map, String key, String time, Boolean ignoreWarnings)` - Look up a reference data map using a specified time, e.g. the event time, and ignore any warnings generated by a failed lookup
* `meta(String key)` - Lookup a meta data value for the current stream using the specified key. The key can be `Feed`, `StreamType`, `CreatedTime`, `EffectiveTime`, `Pipeline` or any other attribute supplied when the stream was sent to Stroom, e.g. meta('System').
* `numeric-ip(String ipAddress)` - Convert an IP address to a numeric representation for range comparison
* `parse-uri(String URI)` - Returns an XML structure of the URI providing `authority`, `fragment`, `host`, `path`, `port`, `query`, `scheme`, `schemeSpecificPart`, and `userInfo` components if present.
* `random()` - Get a system generated random number between 0 and 1.
* `search-id()` - Get the id of the batch search when a pipeline is processing as part of a batch search
* `stream-id()` - Get the id of the current input stream that is being processed
* `hex-to-dec(String hex)` - Convert hex to dec representation
* `hex-to-oct(String hex)` - Convert hex to oct representation
* `pipeline-name()` - Name of the current processing pipeline using the XSLT
* `put(String key, String value)` - Store a value for use later on in the translation

## `dictionary()`
The dictionary() function gets the contents of the specified dictionary for use during translation.
 The main use for this function is to allow users to abstract the management of a set of keywords from
 the XSLT so that it is easier for some users to make quick alterations to a dictionary that is used
 by some XSLT, without the need for the user to understand the complexities of XSLT.

## `format-date()`
The format-date() function takes a Pattern and optional TimeZone arguments and replaces the parsed
contents with an XML standard Date Format. The pattern must be a Java based SimpleDateFormat.  If the
optional TimeZone argument is present the pattern must not include the time zone pattern tokens (z and Z).
A special time zone value of "GMT/BST" can be used to guess the time based on the date (BST during
British Summer Time).

E.g. Convert a GMT date time "2009/12/01 12:34:11"

```xml
    <xsl:value-of select="s:format-date('2009/08/01 12:34:11', 'yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss')"/>
```

E.g. Convert a GMT or BST date time "2009/08/01 12:34:11"

```xml
    <xsl:value-of select="s:format-date('2009/08/01 12:34:11', 'yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss', 'GMT/BST')"/>
```

E.g. Convert a GMT+1:00 date time "2009/08/01 12:34:11"

```xml
    <xsl:value-of select="s:format-date('2009/08/01 12:34:11', 'yyyy/MM/dd HH:mm:ss', 'GMT+1:00')"/>
```

E.g. Convert a date time specified as milliseconds since the epoch "1269270011640"

```xml
    <xsl:value-of select="s:format-date('1269270011640')"/>
```

Time Zone Must be as per the rules defined in SimpleDateFormat under General Time Zone syntax.

## `lookup()`
The lookup() function looks up from reference or context data a value (which can be an XML node set) and adds it
to the resultant XML.  If the look up fails no result will be returned. By testing the result a default value may be output if no result is returned.

E.g. Look up a SID given a PF

```xml
    <xsl:variable name="pf" select="PFNumber"/>
    <xsl:if test="$pf">
       <xsl:variable name="sid" select="s:lookup('PF_TO_SID', $pf, $formattedDateTime)"/>

       <xsl:choose>
          <xsl:when test="$sid">
             <User>
                 <Id><xsl:value-of select="$sid"/></Id>
             </User>
          </xsl:when>
          <xsl:otherwise>
             <data name="PFNumber">
                <xsl:attribute name="Value"><xsl:value-of select="$pf"/></xsl:attribute>
             </data>
          </xsl:otherwise>
       </xsl:choose>
    </xsl:if>
```

## `link()`
Create a string that represents a hyperlink for display in a dashboard table.
```
link(url)
link(title, url)
link(title, url, type)
```

Example
```
link('http://www.somehost.com/somepath')
> [http://www.somehost.com/somepath](http://www.somehost.com/somepath)
link('Click Here','http://www.somehost.com/somepath')
> [Click Here](http://www.somehost.com/somepath)
link('Click Here','http://www.somehost.com/somepath', 'dialog')
> [Click Here](http://www.somehost.com/somepath){dialog}
link('Click Here','http://www.somehost.com/somepath', 'dialog|Dialog Title')
> [Click Here](http://www.somehost.com/somepath){dialog|Dialog Title}
```

Type can be one of:
* `dialog` : Display the content of the link URL within a stroom popup dialog.
* `tab` : Display the content of the link URL within a stroom tab.
* `browser` : Display the content of the link URL within a new browser tab.
* `dashboard` : Used to launch a stroom dashboard internally with parameters in the URL.

If you wish to override the default title or URL of the target link in either a tab or dialog you can. Both `dialog` and `tab` types allow titles to be specified after a `|`, e.g. `dialog|My Title`.

## `log()`
The log() function writes a message to the processing log with the specified severity.
 Severities of INFO, WARN, ERROR and FATAL can be used.
 Severities of ERROR and FATAL will result in records being omitted from the output if a RecordOutputFilter is used in the pipeline.
 The counts for RecWarn, RecError will be affected by warnings or errors generated in this way therefore this function is useful for adding business rules to XML output.

E.g. Warn if a SID is not the correct length.

```xml
    <xsl:if test="string-length($sid) != 7">
      <xsl:value-of select="s:log('WARN', concat($sid, ' is not the correct length'))"/>
    </xsl:if>
```

## `put()` and `get()`
You can put values into a map using the put() function. These values can then be retrieved
later using the get() function. Values are stored against a key name so that multiple values
can be stored. These functions can be used for many purposes but are most commonly used to
count a number of records that meet certain criteria.

An example of how to count records is shown below:

```xml
    <!-- Get the current record count -->
    <xsl:variable name="currentCount" select="number(s:get('count'))" />

    <!-- Increment the record count -->
    <xsl:variable name="count">
      <xsl:choose>
        <xsl:when test="$currentCount">
          <xsl:value-of select="$currentCount + 1" />
        </xsl:when>
        <xsl:otherwise>
          <xsl:value-of select="1" />
        </xsl:otherwise>
      </xsl:choose>
    </xsl:variable>

    <!-- Store the count for future retrieval -->
    <xsl:value-of select="s:put('count', $count)" />

    <!-- Output the new count -->
    <data name="Count">
      <xsl:attribute name="Value" select="$count" />
    </data>
```

## `parse-uri()`
The parse-uri() function takes a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) in string form and returns an XML node with a namespace of `uri` containing the URI's individual components of `authority`, `fragment`, `host`, `path`, `port`, `query`, `scheme`, `schemeSpecificPart` and `userInfo`. See either [RFC 2306: Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax](http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2396.txt) or Java's java.net.URI Class for details regarding the components.

The following xml

```xml
    <!-- Display and parse the URI contained within the text of the rURI element -->
    <xsl:variable name="u" select="s:parseUri(rURI)" />

    <URI>
      <xsl:value-of select="rURI" />
    </URI>
    <URIDetail>
      <xsl:copy-of select="$v"/>
    </URIDetail>
```
given the rURI text contains
```
   http://foo:bar@w1.superman.com:8080/very/long/path.html?p1=v1&amp;p2=v2#more-details
```
would provide
```xml
    <URL>http://foo:bar@w1.superman.com:8080/very/long/path.html?p1=v1&amp;p2=v2#more-details</URL>
    <URIDetail>
      <authority xmlns="uri">foo:bar@w1.superman.com:8080</authority>
      <fragment xmlns="uri">more-details</fragment>
      <host xmlns="uri">w1.superman.com</host>
      <path xmlns="uri">/very/long/path.html</path>
      <port xmlns="uri">8080</port>
      <query xmlns="uri">p1=v1&amp;p2=v2</query>
      <scheme xmlns="uri">http</scheme>
      <schemeSpecificPart xmlns="uri">//foo:bar@w1.superman.com:8080/very/long/path.html?p1=v1&amp;p2=v2</schemeSpecificPart>
      <userInfo xmlns="uri">foo:bar</userInfo>
    </URIDetail>
```
